But the synthesis, which it is the social function of Philosophy to 
construct, will neither be real nor permanent, unless it embraces every 
department of human nature, whether speculative, effective, or practical. 
These three orders of phenomena react upon each other so intimately, 
that any system which does not include all of them must inevitably be 
unreal and inadequate. Yet it is only in the present day, when Philosophy 
is reaching the positive stage, that this which is her highest and most 
essential mission can be fully apprehended. 
The Theological synthesis failed to include the practical side of 
human nature 
The theological synthesis depended exclusively upon our affective 
nature; and this is owing its original supremacy and its ultimate decline. 
For a long time its influence over all our highest speculations was 
paramount. This was especially the case during the Polytheistic 
period,10 when Imagination and Feeling still retained their sway under 
very slight restraint from the reasoning faculties. Yet even during the 
time of its highest development, intellectually and socially, theology 
exercised no real control over practical life. It reacted, of course, upon it 
to some extent, but the effects of this were in most cases far more 
apparent than real. There was a natural antagonism between them, which 
though at first hardly perceived, went on increasing till at last it brought 
about the entire destruction of the theological fabric. A system so purely 
subjective could not harmonize with the necessarily objective tendencies 
and stubborn realities of practical life. Theology asserted all phenomena 
to be under the dominion of Wills more or less arbitrary: whereas in 
practical life men were led more and more clearly to the conception of 
invariable Laws. For without laws human action would have admitted of 
no rule or plan. In consequence of this utter inability of theology to deal 
with practical life, its treatment of speculative and even of moral 
problems was exceedingly imperfect, such problems being all more or 
less dependent on the practical necessities of life. To present a perfectly 
synthetic view of human nature was, then, impossible as long as the 
influence of theology lasted; because the Intellect was impelled by 
Feeling and by the Active powers in two totally different directions. The 
failure of all metaphysical attempts to form a synthesis need not be